Hello, dear listeners.
We will consider a short business planning course with you.
My name is Alexey Nemtinov.
I work at the British Higher School of Design in Moscow.
The total work experience in the field of higher and postgraduate education is more than 7 years.
I have two diplomas, a Russian diploma of an engineer-builder and a diploma of an organization manager.
And one foreign diploma, a master's dissertation,
defended at the Columbia University of Missouri, USA,
on the specialization of education management and analysis of educational policy.
I also have a rich experience of working in business.
From 1994 to 2000 I worked as a director of the Nizhny Novgorod representative of the Italian company Marazzi,
which produces ceramic tiles.
From 2000 to 2002 I worked as a co-founder and general director of the Nizhny Novgorod commercial company Delta 2000.
And in 2004-2005 I worked as a consultant researcher at the Center for Small Business Development in Columbia, USA.
I would like to start with a brief history of the creation of this course.
The basis of the course is a business plan used by the Center for Small Business Development in Columbia, USA,
to train American entrepreneurs, owners of their own business, to business planning skills.
This business plan has been successfully used by local entrepreneurs working in the construction industry for many years.
Since 2005, the course is constantly being revised and edited for small and medium-sized enterprises.
In this regard, I would be very grateful for any feedback and recommendations on improving the course.
Let's briefly focus on the purpose of studying the course and what knowledge, skills and skills should be acquired to complete the course.
First, you need to learn to formulate your business idea in a short and clear way.
And secondly, you need to learn to express this business idea and its implementation plan on a computer screen and on paper.
When you learn this, you will use the business plan you have created as your instruction for where you are going when you have any questions.
Let's look at the screen at the purpose of studying our course from a theoretical point of view,
and how it sounds from a methodological point of view.
The purpose of studying the course is to learn to formulate a business plan for enterprises operating in the field of small and medium-sized businesses.
Upon completion of the course, you should have acquired the knowledge of the content and purpose of the main sections of the business plan,
the ability to apply the knowledge gained in practice, and the skills of writing a business plan for the activities of a particular enterprise.
Now let's briefly look at the content of our video lecture.
The video lecture opens with the purpose and main goals of the business plan, and then we will look at the seven sections of which this video lecture consists.
The first section is called the introductory part and reflects the introductory part of the business plan that we are going to write.
Like all other sections, the introductory part consists of methodological instructions, examples and so-called useful tips.
These useful tips are collected from various sources, and they include the advice of professionals who wrote a business plan for enterprises of small and medium-sized businesses.
At the end of this part, we will perform a control task, which is the introductory part.
The second section is the essence of the project. This is already a section of the business plan itself, this is not the introductory part, this is already the essence of the project.
As in the first part, there will be methodological instructions, examples, useful advice, advice from professionals, and we will perform two control tasks.
One is called the enterprise mission, the other is the enterprise description.
The next section that we will consider is called the market.
Here we will briefly consider the methods of market research, or rather, we will not even consider them, but we will just remember the methods of market research that you have previously studied within other disciplines.
And we will perform the fourth control task, which is called the buyer's portrait.
The next, fourth section is the production plan. Here we will consider the methodology of writing a production plan, we will consider several examples, and also together we will analyze the useful tips that professionals give when writing a production plan.
The next section is sales and marketing. Here, as in the previous sections, methodological instructions and useful tips are given.
The sixth section is enterprise management, also methodological instructions, examples, useful tips.
And the seventh section, I would like to dwell on it in particular.
This section is called the financial plan, but this section, the financial plan, is considered in detail within other disciplines.
Therefore, we will consider this financial plan only theoretically, we will consider examples of the implementation of these financial plans, we will consider the simplification method of writing a financial plan, we will see how to determine the point of profitability and the coefficient of profitability.
In addition, there is such a section of the business plan, which is called the application. Here you can place any information in this application that you consider inappropriate for the seven specified sections.
Here we have the content of the video lecture, as I said, consists of seven sections, and the seventh section is the financial plan. When you write your business plan, it will be called the business plan of a commercial enterprise, you will also have seven sections.
And they will be called exactly the same, these sections, as we have just voiced the content of the video lecture. The only thing is that the financial plan is not included in this section, and the seventh section that you will have is called the application.
Moreover, this section is not mandatory. If you have any information that you do not want to include in your business plan, include it in the application. If you do not have such information, your business plan will consist of only six sections.
Let's now focus on the purpose and main goals of the business plan. Such a classic definition of a business plan is a brief, accurate, accessible and understandable description of the business or deal. This is a definition that is used in many textbooks and in many guidelines for writing a business plan.
In terms of its value, it is the most important tool when considering various situations. The business plan allows you to choose the most promising solution and determine the means of their achievement.
The business plan performs four functions. These four functions are quite peculiar in terms of the weight of these functions in the Russian and foreign entrepreneurs. Let's first mention these four functions.
The first function is related to the ability to use the business plan to develop a business strategy. The second function is planning. The third function is related to attracting money. And the fourth function is related to attracting companies and potential partners to implement the plan.
For the Russian entrepreneurs, the first function is related to the development of a business strategy. The second function is related to planning. The third function is related to attracting money. And the fourth function is related to attracting potential partners.
In our case, we will focus on the third and fourth functions. We will write a business plan to attract money and potential partners. This is the main goal of writing a business plan.
The first and second functions are important for the Russian entrepreneurs. We will consider the first function as a business plan to develop a business strategy and the second function as planning.
Let's briefly discuss the classification of business plans. There are seven most common business plans on the screen. There are no clean business plans, such as the business plan of the organization or the business plan of the loan application.
All of them are somehow intersected. But if we consider what is important for our course, we will focus on the business plan of the organization, the business plan of the loan application and, perhaps, the business plan of the grant application.
There is also a business plan of the organizational division. We do not mean the business plan of the organizational division. But if we talk about the development of a business, we can consider a new stage of business development as a business plan of the organizational division.
This is the classification of business plans. Now let's look at the structure of the standard business plan and its main sections. We have already discussed that we have seven sections, and the seventh section is either a financial plan or an application.
In addition, there is a standard structure of the business plan in the world practice. Let's look at the screen where the typical structure of the business plan is presented, which includes the following sections.
The first section is the title sheet. The second section is the introductory part, it is also called a summary. The third section is the analysis of the situation in the industry. The fourth section is the essence of the project. The fifth section is the marketing plan. The sixth section is the production plan. The seventh section is the organizational plan. The eighth section is the risk assessment. The ninth section is the financial plan. And the tenth section is the application.
These are all the sections that can be presented in the business plan. There are various modifications of these sections. Our modification is seven sections of the business plan.
I would like to say again about the peculiarities of business planning in Russian specific conditions. This is explained by the specific economic and social situation that does not allow to use foreign methods directly. Therefore, Russian authors often use methods different from the Western methods and approaches to making business plans.
Within the framework of this course, there is no task to consider these methods, so if someone is interested in more details about these methods, they can be found in the corresponding sections of the listed literature.
If you pay attention, then in the list of literature, this literature is marked with numbers 3, 4, 5 and 10. Under these numbers are marked the corresponding sources of literature, where you can familiarize yourself with the methods of writing business plans by Russian entrepreneurs.
The next point is software development and assessment of the efficiency of business plans on the Russian market. In recent years, many domestic software products have appeared, and many of them are of very high quality and can compete with Western software products.
Among these products are Alt-Invest, the developer of which is the research and consulting firm Alt, Teo-Invest, the developer of the Institute of Management Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, and the Project Expert program, the developer of the company Pro-Invest Consulting.
Among these three, another leader stands out, this leader is the Project Expert Professional for Windows. This is an automated system that allows you to model the activity of an enterprise in the conditions of market relations.
As we have already said, in the world practice of entrepreneurship, the main goal of writing a business plan is to attract money and investors. In Russian conditions, emphasis is placed on the development of strategies and planning. The same trend also applies to Project Expert.
Another feature of the Project Expert system is the user privacy. Data is entered in the form of unrelated volumes of information, at the output we get analytical graphs and financial reports. This software is a wonderful tool for the work of financial analysts and other business planning specialists.
Unfortunately, this feature does not allow using this software as a simple and accessible training program. Therefore, be familiar with this program. If someone wants to learn more about it, there is a lot of literature and ready-made packages of Project Expert programs. You can take this program and use it.
In order to work with this program, you need to collect the original data, enter it into this program, and as a result you will receive all sections of your business plan, including the financial section, including financial reports, including analysis and including other schedules. This will be a detailed professional document on making a business plan.
Now let's get back to our course. The course is a simple and accessible business plan. Its brief content, as we have already said, has the following view. This content is presented on the screen. I repeat again, without the seventh section. In the seventh section we had a financial plan. In this case, the seventh section will be an application.
The first is the introductory part, the second is the essence of the project, the third section is the market, the fourth is the production plan, the fifth is the sales and marketing section, the sixth is the management section, and the seventh is the application, which is not required to perform the final work. Your business plan can include only six sections.
As we have already said, the course includes the main part, which consists of the methodology of describing the business plan and useful tips on how to avoid typical mistakes.
We also have a very large package of programs that are included in the application, a package of electronic documents. These applications contain numerous examples of four control tasks for developing skills in writing separate sections and subsections of the business plan, as well as two integral business plans.
One integral business plan is written for the enterprise of the medium business, a society with limited responsibility for blood. This business plan serves as an example of the implementation of control work. You can use it in any case, in any situation. Just take it as an instruction, study its sections, and somewhere in some places it will be like a textbook for you to write a business plan.
The second business plan for a small business enterprise that is not a legal entity is the business plan without a legal entity, Colorit. The business plan Colorit contains characteristic errors with comments and corrections.
As you study the course, as you go through this video course and our communication with you, I will very often refer to these two business plans. There are a lot of examples of how to write a business plan and how not to write a business plan. I repeat again, how not to write a business plan. This is done from the point of view of educational purposes and so that you do not repeat these mistakes.
If you open the application and open this business plan for the Colorit enterprise, the places that are unsuccessful and that are written with errors, they are highlighted either in a different color or they are highlighted in a cursive.
Let's stop at the first part of the business plan, the introductory part. The introductory part of the business plan includes the title sheet, summary and content. The introductory part serves to create the first impression on the reader. After reading the introductory part, the reader will decide whether your business plan is interesting to him or not.
The purpose of the title sheet is to be informative and brief, so only information about your enterprise should be placed on the title sheet. The next section is the summary. The summary should convince the reader that the business plan is a well-thought-out document and its reading will not be a waste of time.
The next section is the content. The content shows how well you have composed the main sections and connected them into one whole. Let's look at each of the business plan sections in more detail.
The title sheet includes the business plan, the company logo, the company address, the telephone number, the fax number, the email address, the project execution date and date. The business plan and the execution of your tasks are displayed in the applications, so you can familiarize yourself in detail with the applications with these documents.
In addition, the application provides two examples. The first example is an example of the execution of your business plan. It is an instruction on how to execute a business plan.
The second example is an example of an enterprise without a legal entity called Colorit. In this example, various errors are intentionally made and recommendations are given on how to eliminate and avoid these errors.
The next section is the summary. The summary is the part of the business plan that most readers begin to familiarize themselves with. Although the business plan is the first page of the business plan, in the practice of entrepreneurship, it is written last.
The summary usually consists of one to three pages of printed text. The business plan is included here, the financial resources and conditions for their provision, the start date of the activity, the current situation, the names of the owners and persons making the main decisions, as well as the results achieved.
What are the tips and recommendations for writing a summary? As we said, the summary is written at the end of all other parts in order to select key points from the main content of the business plan and include them in the summary.
As we have a training course, we will write a summary first. We start with a summary and we will even have a task that includes writing a summary. You write a summary based on the instructions and recommendations that are given in the application.
The next piece of advice is that entrepreneurs who are experienced in writing business plans usually do so. They write a summary and after the summary is written, they give it to specialists and people who do not have the information.
This can be an entrepreneur who is familiar with your business, or a person who does not know anything about your business. After he reads the summary, he should have an idea of what your business plan is and what your business plan conveys to him.
The second point is that you give the business plan to a person who is familiar with your business. Here is the opinion of an expert. If the feedback is positive, then your summary is positive and you can stop writing the summary.
If, as a result of this feedback, you get some negative answers, and the person who read your summary does not give the information that you expected from him, then you need to correct your summary. In any case, the summary should be concise and interesting, and only in this case will the reader have the opportunity to read your entire business plan.
After you have learned the theoretical aspects of writing a summary, please open the e-book and read two examples. One example is to make a summary of an existing business, and the second example is to make a summary of a newly created business.
The last section is the content. The content gives the reader the opportunity to quickly and easily access all sections of your business plan.
Therefore, all pages of your business plan must be numbered, and the content must include the numbering of pages.
Now it's time to complete the first task. This task includes the title sheet, summary and content. The title sheet is executed without any changes, it is executed in the usual standard form.
As for the summary, it is written in the form of a draft version. Now, until you start writing the entire business plan, it is difficult for you to write a summary. As we have already said, the summary is written last, after the entire business plan is written.
Now you are just creating a draft version, and this draft version will include your ideas for writing a business plan. Do not strive for it to include one page or three pages of printed text. Just look at the task and the task details what questions you need to answer.
Then, during the writing of the rest of the business plan, you will correct your summary. The last one is the content. The content of your business plan at this stage is, of course, without the numbering of pages.
You just list the sections that you will include. The sections that will be included in your task can be seen in the examples and in this control task.
The next section of the business plan is the essence of the project. The essence of the project is already a section of the business plan that includes not superficial acquaintance with the project, its goal is not to interest the reader, but here information is already given on your business plan.
Here you need to present a clear and concise description of the business activity, and this description should be objective and answer the following questions. Who are you? What do you offer? What market needs are you going to satisfy? And why is your business idea viable?
This section consists of five sections. The first section is the analysis of the situation in the industry. The second section is the description of the type of business activity. The next third section is the description of the product or service. The fourth section is the positioning of the enterprise. And the fifth section is the price strategy.
The first section is the analysis of the situation in the industry. What should be reflected here? Here is a brief analysis of the situation in the industry. You do not go into details, you just analyze what is happening in the industry at the moment.
Then you write about the prospects of the market development, what are the trends, what can be expected from the market, and so on. And here you need to specify your role in this market sector. Either you are already working in this market and you are trying to strengthen your sphere of influence, or you are just trying to get into this market.
You reflect your role in this market sector. When writing this section, as well as when writing a summary, use artistic writing style. Explain why certain events occur. In this section, you only need to indicate your competitors. You do not need to discuss competitors. Analysis and discussion of competitors will be done in the next section, which is called the market.
As for the conclusions you make here, all conclusions should be supported by facts with the indication of sources of information. Each person who writes a business plan or a team that writes a business plan always has some subjective opinion, some subjective judgments. In a business plan, these subjective opinions should be absent. If you make a conclusion, specify on what basis you did it and support it with sources of information.
And another piece of advice that should be used is a potential problem. You do not need to hide when you plan your activity that everything will be smooth and there will be no negative moments.
On the contrary, you include these negative moments and give advice and recommendations on what to do to alleviate negative consequences. And again, all this is done in an artistic style.
That is, when a reader gets acquainted with your business plan and sees that you have artistically described these moments and problems and see how to alleviate negative consequences, in the future he will be aware that you have carefully worked out your business plan.
And besides, you worked on how to convey this to the readers and users who will work with your business plan in the future.
The next section is the description of the type of business. The description of the type of business begins with the formulation of the mission in the enterprise. The mission in a concentrated form expresses the meaning of the existence of the company, its purpose.
Unfortunately, the peculiarity of the Russian business is that the mission is not formulated in many enterprises. Many enterprises work and exist, but the mission is absent.
This is a historical fact, a historical event. In the West, on the contrary, any organization, any company begins with the formulation of the meaning of the existence of the company and its purpose.
And when you go to Western enterprises, whether it is a small enterprise or a large enterprise, you can very often meet the mission of the enterprise, highlighted in the form of a poster or in the form of some slogan, and so on.
Therefore, within the framework of our business plan, we will give this meaning and begin to describe the type of business in the enterprise with the formulation of the mission of the enterprise.
In the electronic manual there are examples of writing a mission, examples of writing a mission on the development of software for accounting, the next example on business consulting, the next example on the opening of a new restaurant and the example on the production of educational toys.
Please, familiarize yourself with these examples and see how professionals write and formulate the mission of their enterprises.
After you familiarize yourself with the examples, we will perform the next control task, which is called the enterprise mission.
In the control task, it is described in detail how it is performed, the subsequent steps in writing the enterprise mission.
The only thing I want to warn you about is that writing the enterprise mission is quite a difficult task.
First, you write unrelated, separate proposals, and although, as we said, the enterprise mission is a brief formulation of the purpose and purpose of the enterprise, first you can even write a dozen or even more proposals for which your enterprise exists.
And in the future, you will need to make one or two proposals from these several proposals, from these several quotes, and so on, in which the mission of your enterprise is reflected.
All this is described in detail in the task, follow the recommendations that are described in the task in the application.
After that, you should not have any problems in writing the enterprise mission.
The enterprise mission
After you complete this control task, you need to present the technical aspects.
The technical aspects should be written in the form of a live and interesting story.
I will list these aspects now.
Please look at them on the screen.
This is dry information.
Here is the type of business listed.
What can it be?
Operating or retail trade, product or service production, or this is a new enterprise, or an existing enterprise.
Also, the form of ownership is reflected here.
Or this is an enterprise without the education of a legal person, or these are some legal organizations.
Also, the main acting persons who work in this organization are indicated here.
Those persons who may not even work, but are the owners or co-founders of this organization, all of them should be reflected.
What market needs are you intending to satisfy?
To whom and how will you sell?
And the last point is what auxiliary tools will be used.
Here can be service maintenance, advertising campaigns, other tools of promotion of a product.
What tools will you need to specify and think about?
As you can see, these are technical aspects, but nevertheless, they should be written in the form of a live and interesting story.
Here you can do the same as you will do when formulating a mission.
That is, you will first list all these facts, and then try to formulate a live and interesting story from these separate, unrelated facts, and combine them into one whole.
What are the professional advice about writing this section of the business plan?
Well, the first point is specialization.
If your enterprise is located, for example, in a rural area, you may not specialize and you may offer a wide range of goods.
Let it be, for example, a store that sells food products.
You can sell almost everything in the rural area, and if you have it alone, your range will be in demand from buyers.
If you work in a large market, then it will require specialization from you.
This is explained by competition, and in this regard, the first advice is to look at how rich your market is, whether you have many competitors.
With high competition, pay attention to specialization, with low competition, be versatile.
The next piece of advice is the numbers of sales volumes and the profits received over the previous period.
If you are opening a new enterprise, then this advice is not relevant.
But if you have worked and are simply expanding your business or opening a new direction, be sure to show what you had in previous years and what profit you have received.
In addition, be sure to indicate the moments when your enterprise was profitable.
If such a fact existed, do not hide this fact, but describe the reasons why the enterprise was profitable and what was done to eliminate these reasons.
And the last piece of advice is the main actors of the company.
As we said, it can be either people who work in the company or people who do not work in this company, but influence it.
Do not be too multilingual, but at the same time do not be short.
You need to choose the golden mean and include in the business plan about these people such information that is really useful and that is needed for your business plan.
Now that we have considered the theoretical part, it is time for the next control task, which is called Describe the Enterprise.
The electronic manual has a detailed description of the enterprise. Just follow the points that are indicated.
The question-answer, the question-answer. After you answer all the questions of this task, try to make them in the form of an artistic work.
Now that we have completed three control tasks, I want to remind you that you will have four tasks.
Each of these four tasks will be included in the fifth task, which is the final task.
The final task should be performed in the form of an artistic story.
For example, the one you have in the application for the enterprise OO Krov.
See how the final control task is performed.
The third control task that you will now perform.
Try to stick to the artistic style, but nevertheless, if you do not succeed in the artistic style, just put down the facts.
Put down the facts on the description of the enterprise.
The next section is called Description of the Product and Service.
Describe in detail the products and services that you offer.
Stop how your product or service will be used.
Include all the necessary details so that the reader has a complete idea of ​​your products or services.
Here you can find various options for description.
As an example, consider the description of the service provided by the company that operates in the service sector.
This example in the application for the enterprise OO Krov is called the description of the service provided by the company operating in the service sector.
What are the tips and recommendations for writing this section?
First, you must stop at the advantages that exist.
For example, this is a well-organized service.
Or, for example, we are located in a convenient place for buyers.
Or we trade at the lowest prices, and so on.
All the advantages that exist, be sure to indicate.
About the specifications of the product, include as much information as possible.
If you think some information is necessary, but it overloads your business plan and it is excessive, put it in the application.
If you have the opportunity, include a photo of your product.
The next tip is about copyright.
Unfortunately, often copied things that are allowed for copying and things that are not allowed for copying.
But nevertheless, this fact exists.
And think about what specific features of your product exist.
And think about how you will improve your product so that it retains its uniqueness.
Competitors will follow you and they will do the same if your product is popular.
Think about the tactics of maintaining the uniqueness of your product.
And the last piece of advice is specific.
Be specific.
Do not write abstractly, we intend to provide the best service.
Just explain how you will do it and why your product is the best.
The next section is called the business positioning.
Business positioning is a specific feature, a specific parameter.
The basis of positioning is the image.
The image is what the market participants have when mentioning your business.
These are the features of your business on the market,
the associations that arise when mentioning your product and services.
If we base our description of the product on its specific features,
then the positioning of the enterprise is based on the opinion of the buyers and competitors.
This is the positioning of the enterprise, this is the image.
Think about what image you want to create for yourself.
How would you like your buyers and competitors to see you and how would they evaluate you?
What are the tips here?
First, to have information, you need to study your competitors.
There are various ways to study your competitors.
You can make purchases in their stores, you can call, you can ask,
you can send your representatives to their organizations,
you can consult, you can consult, and so on.
In any case, you need to study your competitors and collect information about them.
In order to collect a list of strong and weak sides of competitors,
consider such parameters as distribution, prices, service, time.
Pay attention to the prices offered by competitors.
What is the reputation of competitors on the market?
And how often do they conduct inquiries from buyers?
In addition, take into account the specifics of the business.
What area do you work in?
If you work, for example, in the field of postal services,
then prices, ease of documenting,
delivery speed, the ability to return goods, and so on, will be important for you.
The next subsection is price policy.
Price policy is a very important section.
Here you need to describe all the costs
from which the price of your product is made.
Describe all these costs, either for your product or for your service,
and formulate the price, what price you will have.
In addition, tell me what place your price will take
among the prices offered by other suppliers of similar goods and services.
Here you need to specify, for example, if you have a low price,
then you do it on purpose, or if you have a high price,
you also do it on purpose.
But in any case, this must be explained,
and in any case, your place among your competitors must be specified.
In addition, it is imperative to specify
how your price will affect the adoption of the product by the market.
How your market will grow in the competitive environment,
and what profit will be obtained.
Useful tips.
First, when writing business plans,
there is often such a mistake, it is price reduction.
Do not reduce the costs in order to set a low price.
You will lose your maneuver, and in the future it will be very difficult for you to increase prices.
It is better to initially set a high price, and then reduce it.
But it will be much more difficult to set a low price and then raise it.
The next point.
If you set a price higher than the competitors, it must be justified.
On what basis are you doing this?
Or is it due to the import of the product,
high quality, high warranty obligations, service maintenance, and so on.
For the reader who will read your business plan, this is very important.
If there is a high price, there must be a justification for this high price.
And vice versa.
If you have a low price, the reader will be interested in why the price is low, what happened.
You also need to justify how you make a profit.
Why is your price lower than the price of competitors?
Another useful tip is how high prices reduce volume.
You can reduce the volume, but make more profit at high prices.
But again, this can only be done in low competition.
If the competition is high, and if, as we said, your product, your service requires concentration,
requires concentration of efforts, requires concentration of resources,
here, of course, we should not talk about high prices.
Market
The next section we are going to discuss is called the market.
The market uses the tools of analysis that you have already studied.
They are familiar to you from the modules of general marketing and strategic management.
Let's briefly explain what these tools are.
The first is the Michael Porter model, with the allocation of five competitive forces that determine the profitability of the industry.
The second method is the PEST analysis.
It is designed to identify political, economic, social and technological aspects of the external environment
that can affect the strategy of the company.
Sometimes it is called PEST analysis,
that is, so many political, economic, social and technological aspects of the external environment are considered here.
Sometimes this analysis is made more extensive.
Here we also study legal factors and environmental protection factors.
In addition, there is another tool called SWOT analysis.
This is a very common methodology in the West,
which considers the strengths and weaknesses of the company,
the opportunities for the company and the threats that exist.
Here, external and internal environment components are studied.
These are the tools that are used to make detailed business plans,
when describing this section of the market.
Within this course, we use a simplified methodology for market research,
and we will consider a slightly different sequence,
a slightly different method of describing this section.
There are four sections here.
The first section is called buyers.
The second section is called the size of the market and its trends.
The third section is competition.
And the fourth section is called the predicted volume of sales.
The main task of this section is not to make a detailed market analysis,
but to use factors to convince an investor or potential partner
or another reader who will read your business plan,
that your business plan has enough clients
and is able to provide the necessary volume of sales.
Here you need to create a detailed portrait of the buyers
on whom your product is aimed.
To create a detailed portrait of the buyer,
you choose an ordinary client and specify his distinctive features.
For example, small restaurant clients can be private entrepreneurs
engaged in organizing and holding weddings or other similar celebrations.
Business clients engaged in selling cars
can be car repair and maintenance workshops.
This is how buyers are described.
It is important to create detailed information about your client.
What useful tips are there?
First, you can narrow the circle of your clients,
indicating those you would not like to see among your buyers.
A experienced seller, for example, will not serve retail buyers.
The next tip is too abstract description.
Be specific and detailed.
A typical mistake is to write, for example,
people who want to buy bicycles or someone who wants to write a resume.
Be more detailed.
Indicate that among these people who want to buy bicycles
it will be either expensive bicycles or cheap bicycles
or sports bicycles, etc.
Be more detailed.
The next tip is to include a geographical market parameter in the description.
It can be an international market,
or a domestic market,
or a regional market,
or a local market.
The next tip is not to use professional jargon.
If it is a professional jargon and you need it,
and you want to include it,
then define those incomprehensible terms that you will use.
Now, after we have considered this section of the market,
I repeat once again that we describe it not in the form of a market analysis,
but in the form of a detailed portrait of your clients, your buyers.
We will perform the last control task,
which is called the buyer's portrait.
Here I want to focus on the tasks that we have performed so far.
We have performed four tasks.
These tasks were the introductory tasks,
when you wrote a summary,
made up a title sheet,
and wrote a content.
The next was the enterprise mission
and the description of the product.
Now, the moment of the fourth control task has come,
which is called the buyer's portrait.
All these four tasks that we have performed so far
were dry tasks where you listed the facts
and followed the instructions.
I told you that when performing these tasks,
you can use the artistic style of writing,
try to use the artistic style of writing.
For example, when we talked about the summary,
we talked about the fact that you perform the summary in the form of a draft,
and then you will return to it again.
At the moment, you have completed all these tasks,
and now we will talk a little about the fifth,
about the last task.
The last task is separate,
because the last task includes the four previous tasks.
But you do not transfer these four previous tasks mechanically
to the fifth task,
but you make up an artistic description.
And this is just the moment
when you need to switch from the detailed descriptions
that you have made in these tasks from 1 to 4
and get the final result.
And get the picture,
and get the business plan,
get the characteristics of your business plan
in the form of an artistic description.
All your characteristics are no longer dry,
not numbers,
but they become connected sentences
in the form of an artistic story.
This is the fourth task.
Let's assume that at the moment
we stopped at these drafts,
and now, when we talk about the next,
about the next sections of the business plan,
we will talk about the fifth control task,
where you include all descriptions
in the form of an artistic story.
And besides this,
in the electronic aid,
I have already talked about this,
there are two examples.
One example is a society
with a limited responsibility for blood,
where, let's say,
this final task is written
for an excellent rating,
which should be seen as an example for writing.
When you will compose your final task
from these four tasks,
add something from other sections,
look at this society
with a limited responsibility for blood.
In this society with a limited responsibility for blood
a business plan for an enterprise is given,
which worked on the Nizhny Novgorod market,
on the Nizhny Novgorod market of building materials.
And the dry facts,
which were inherent in any enterprise,
they were interpreted, adapted,
as you like,
in the form of a connected and interesting story
about this enterprise.
When you read this example,
there is a desire to read it further and further,
due to the fact that this example
is processed in such a way
that it is not a fiction.
The second example I told you about
is an example of writing a business plan
for an enterprise without the education
of a legal person, Koloriv.
Mistakes are deliberately made there,
we have already talked about this with you,
and in some places
a dry description is given,
facts that are not connected with each other are given.
When you will write your final task,
look at these two examples
and follow the first example
of a society with limited responsibility for roofing
and avoid writing a business plan
according to the scenario
that was used when writing a business plan
for an enterprise without the education
of a legal person, Koloriv.
And one more difference
between these two enterprises.
If an enterprise without the education
of a legal person
is a small business enterprise,
then a society with limited responsibility for roofing
is a medium-sized business enterprise.
Therefore, look at
who will describe which organization,
explore the parameters,
the points that are given
for an enterprise of a medium-sized business
or for an enterprise of a small business.
The size of the market and its trends.
Here you need to describe the overall size of the market
and the sector in which your business will develop.
Statistical data is studied here,
information is given
about the successfully functioning sectors of the market
at the present time
for forecasting future trends of development.
In addition, you need to describe the target market.
Geographical data,
the size of the company,
lifestyle, gender, age,
gender and other data
are used here to describe the characteristics of the organization
and individual clients
who will buy your product.
When you describe the characteristics of the organization
and individual clients
who will buy your product,
when you describe this section of the business plan,
decide who your clients are.
Either these are organizations,
legal entities
or private clients.
Please open the e-mail
and familiarize yourself with the example,
which is called the size of the market.
This is a society with limited responsibility
for roofing.
called Aristotle.
The geographical location of this society is Yaroslavl.
This example
gives an example of research
of the size of the market
in this city for entrepreneurs
who do business from home.
The next section is called
the size of the market and its trends.
Here you need to describe the total market size
and the sector in which your business will develop.
Study the statistical data
and information about the successfully functioning sectors of the market
at the present time
to predict future trends and developments.
In addition, you need to stop at your target market
using geographical data,
the size of the company,
the lifestyle, gender, age,
gender and other data
to describe the characteristics of the organization
and individual clients
who will buy your product or service.
You need to decide
whether you work with organizations
or with private clients.
If you work with both,
you will need to describe both clients.
Next,
we need to familiarize ourselves with the example of the size of the market.
This example is given in the applications.
It is called the size of the market
and
it describes
the activity of a society with limited responsibility
Aristotle
in the study of the market in the city of Yaroslavl.
Entrepreneurs are being studied
who are engaged in private business from home.
What useful tips are given here?
First, you need to pay attention to the factors
that affect the growth of the market.
The trends in the industry,
the socio-economic trends,
the government policy,
migration of the population
and other similar factors.
You need to note
how these trends will affect your business.
This will not be just a list of factors,
but again,
write in the form of a related story.
There is such a trend
and such a trend will affect my business,
the activity of my enterprise in some way.
In addition, you must specify the sources of information.
The sources of information
will demonstrate to the reader of the business plan
that you have studied the relevant literature
and that your information is objective.
When writing a business plan,
there should not be subjective judgments,
as we have already said,
there should be only an objective reality.
The next section is called competition.
In the competition section,
you need to tell
in which sector of the market
your goods or services
are competitive.
You need to tell briefly
about each of the competitors
and explain why you can compete with them
and win or seize
part of their market share.
Divide the strong and weak sides of the competitors
by such parameters as
sales volume,
quality,
distribution,
price,
production capacity,
image,
and variety of goods or services.
You need to answer such questions
as who is the leader in price,
who is the leader in quality,
who has seized the largest share of the market,
why some companies have recently entered the market
and continue to work there,
and some companies have entered the market
and left the market.
You need to answer these questions.
This is the task of the competition section.
In the electronic tool,
there is an example of competitive analysis
in the city of Arkhangelsk.
There,
a company is opening
for photo services
and detailed competitive analysis
is being carried out
on existing competitors
that are engaged in photo services.
What useful tips are there?
First, when you write a business plan,
you should not say that you have competitors.
There have always been and will always be competitors.
If you write this,
first, you will give your subjective judgment,
that means you have not worked out the information in detail,
you just did not find competitors.
And the second point, which is negative,
creditors will not believe you
if you write that you have no competitors.
To determine the strengths and weaknesses of competitors,
you need to assess the real advantages
that push customers to buy goods from them,
and not from some other sellers.
And the last piece of advice
that should be adhered to
is that you should not develop ridiculous plans.
Again, for the same reasons.
First, creditors will not believe you,
and secondly, you are deluding yourself.
A common mistake is
when you plan modest results in the first years,
due to the opening of the enterprise,
you think that it will be difficult for you
and your business will move slowly
and in small steps,
and then, when your business develops,
you will have an explosion.
In fact, this is not the case.
You should consider the development of your business
in a stable, consistent way
both in the first and subsequent years.
And in any case,
you need to reinforce your conclusions
and your subjective judgments
with objective factors.
The next section that we will consider
is called the forecast sales volume.
This section should include
sales volume in units of goods
and in units of money.
Here, in a short summary,
in one paragraph,
tell us about the differences
between your goods or services
from goods or services
implemented by other companies on the market.
What are the prospects of the number of buyers on the market
and what are the planned events
to attract them to the number of customers?
The same thing.
Please open the e-mail
and read the forecast sales volume.
What are the following tips?
If you receive data
about the average sales of a buyer
from official publications,
from the results of personnel surveys,
interviews with the owners of enterprises
or other information materials,
be sure to specify these sources.
First,
the first point is
that you are already officially using this information.
This is already good.
And the second point is
that you will convince the reader of your business plan
that you have studied these materials
and are familiar with the information.
The next section,
under the section of the market,
is called the production plan.
Here you need to describe
the state of your goods or services at the moment
and what you plan to undertake
for its development.
This section is represented by five subsections.
The first subsection is called
the current state of affairs.
The second subsection is the production process.
The third is the cost of development.
The fourth and the next section
is the required labor costs.
And the last subsection
is the costs and capital costs.
For each of these subsections,
the first subsection is called
the current state of affairs.
Here you describe
the state, the degree of readiness
of your goods or services
and what remains to be done
so that your goods are fully ready
to enter the market.
If your goods are ready to enter the market,
you note this.
If you need any improvements,
you write a detailed plan
on how to do this.
For these purposes,
a traditional draft plan
for making a timetable is used.
For example,
you write dates in the left column,
and write events in the right column.
Or vice versa.
You write a date in the hat,
and write events in the left column.
The final version
should be simple and clear to the reader.
The draft version of the plan
is made for you,
and the final version
of the enterprise development
will be placed in the business plan.
An example of a draft version
of the enterprise development
with a breakdown
of events and dates
is given in the following example,
which is called
a draft version of the enterprise development plan.
Business plan
The production process
is an important section
of the business plan,
since the investor will invest money
only in the business
that is clear and understandable to him.
Therefore, here you need to go
through all stages
from the moment of creation of an idea
to the moment of sale.
What are the useful tips
that professionals give here?
First, you need to justify
the strategy of the organization
chosen for you
from the point of view of getting more profit.
Either this is your own production
of services,
or this is hiring private individuals
or other enterprises.
Very often, enterprises fully provide
the whole process.
They make purchases
and work with the hands of other people.
And often there is still such a moment
when a combined enterprise is being made.
In any case,
either you do everything yourself,
or you hire some private professionals,
or you do everything together,
everything needs to be justified and explained.
The next point
that needs to be pointed out
are the reasons that affected
the choice of the location of your enterprise.
And the last point,
which we have already discussed.
In one of the examples,
we analyzed a home business.
If you also have a home business,
you need to describe its advantages
and indicate why you are doing
this particular business.
Indicate that your business
is possible for the organization
in its home conditions
and no negative consequences
will be caused by the location
of all your work
in the home conditions.
And a few more comments
about the strategy.
What we have discussed,
either you produce or you buy,
you first make a description,
and then you already
designate the strategy.
That is,
despite the fact that you will
either produce or buy,
you must formulate a strategy.
A clear, specific strategy,
that you, for example, said,
yes, we only produce,
or yes, we only buy,
naturally cannot be.
At some point,
you will step back from this strategy,
but it is a strategy
that should be flexible.
Therefore, you decide for yourself
that we only produce,
we only buy,
or we both produce and buy.
And then, when you choose
the tactics of achieving these goals,
you will be able to
make a decision
that will be more
effective for you.
Well, about the location of your work.
You need to specify
where your goods or services are located.
This is again related
to the point of view of profit,
from the point of view of
financial resources,
from the point of view of costs.
If you have chosen a place for rent,
you have chosen it,
geographically,
for example,
convenient access roads are located,
or, on the other hand,
it is located outside the city,
but you have chosen this enterprise for rent,
because there is a low cost of rent.
There, for example,
it is convenient for suppliers,
you can organize convenient entrances,
or you choose some area
where the cost of labor is low,
the cost of materials is low.
There are many factors here,
how you choose a place of activity,
and all these factors need to be justified.
The next section is called
the cost of production and development.
Here you need to describe
and justify the articles of the budget for development.
Here the cost of labor,
materials,
consulting services,
and the cost of services
of the so-called auxiliary workers,
which are called office workers,
well, as an example,
you can bring lawyers.
What useful professional advice
do you have here?
Well, first of all,
before you start doing this,
you need to determine
some starting point for yourself.
You need to contact the trading organizations
to determine the average cost
of product development
similar to yours.
And already when you start
your business plan,
you will have an orientation
that you should adhere to.
Next, you need to make a plan
in case of a break in the delivery deadlines,
a failure to meet industry standards,
mistakes, and so on.
This should never be avoided.
There is no predictable business.
Business is always
unpredictable.
This is what is called
an additional costs plan.
Of course, you do not foresee everything,
but you can assume something,
we will even say in quotation marks
to foresee,
and you can write it down
in the form of some rough plan.
And this is what you should do
in case of a break in the delivery deadlines.
And the next step
is to determine
the cost of obtaining patents
and other costs
that are necessary
for the production of your goods and services.
This is a very important section,
so we stopped at it in detail.
The next point
is the required labor costs.
Regarding the required labor costs,
all labor costs
that are required
are the following.
Is there enough qualified staff
to perform the work
that you have planned?
If not,
how will you hire staff?
Or will you turn to another market?
Or will you take
some other actions?
This should be considered
and reflected in the business plan.
The next point
is the qualification of your employees.
Are your employees qualified enough?
There are several options.
If they are not qualified enough,
you should simply reflect this in your business plan.
The second option
is to reduce the costs.
You intentionally hire unqualified employees,
but you train them during the training.
If this is the case,
you should indicate how you plan to train them.
The cost of the current
and future labor costs are also indicated here.
And, again,
at the time of training,
you should indicate a promising plan
for training staff.
In the electronic certificate,
as we have already discussed,
there are examples
of the implementation
of this section of the business plan.
This example is called
the required labor costs.
Please open this electronic certificate
as we address the examples.
And read these examples.
In the future,
this will help you write your business plan.
I am telling you this
not so that you
read all these examples
dryly,
but so that you can see
how these examples are implemented by professionals
and how you can use this example
to write your business plan section.
Examples are given not so that you
take some pieces of these examples
and insert them into your business plan,
but examples are given so that you
analyze this information
and, based on the analysis,
you have already made your business plan sections.
The next section is called
the costs and capital costs.
Here,
you will need
three financial documents
that will be the basis
for the financial section of the business plan.
As we said,
we do not make up the financial business plan
because you study it
in other disciplines.
But for the real business plan,
these three documents are very important,
and the financial plan
is based on these
three documents.
What are these documents?
The first document is the current costs.
The second document is the capital costs.
And the third document is the cost of goods.
Current costs are classified
as marketing expenses,
expenses related to sales
and overhead expenses.
The second point is the capital costs.
These are the money
to purchase equipment
for the initial and subsequent stages
of your business development.
In addition,
amortization calculations
for the wear of purchased equipment.
Very often,
amortization calculations
are recommended
in all literature
to pay attention to this,
because it is a large amount
of capital costs.
The next document
is the cost of goods.
It includes raw materials, equipment,
wages, etc.
For a seller,
whether it is a retail seller
or wholesale seller,
these are expenses for buying inventory.
For a production enterprise,
these are raw materials,
labor resources
and overhead expenses
directly related to production.
Take a creative approach
to this process
and include in the current costs,
capital costs
and cost of goods
everything you think
will be relevant for your organization.
Now we move on
to the next section of the business plan,
which is called sales and marketing.
Sales and marketing
consists of several sections.
This section describes the strategy
and tactics that you use
to attract buyers.
The sales and marketing section
includes three sections.
The first section is called
sales and marketing strategy.
The second section is called
the sales method.
And the third section is called
advertising, promotion of goods, services.
The next section
is called sales and marketing strategy.
This is a very important section.
Here you choose the strategy
that you will use.
The strategy should include
no more than a few sentences
or a couple of paragraphs.
An important element
for the sales and marketing strategy
is the choice of target customers.
Other elements of the sales and marketing strategy
are how you will find
the clients you are looking for
and how you will inform them
about your product.
What features of your product
or service will you emphasize
so that the buyer will notice your product?
What innovative methods
of sales and marketing
will you use?
Will you focus your efforts
in the region, in the country
or in the international market?
Are you planning to expand
the sales scale in the future and why?
Here I would like to refer
to the examples that we have
in the applications.
The first example is for a society
called Ukrov,
where they talk about enterprises
that have been existing
in the market for a long time
and have their own niche
but are trying to strengthen
their influence.
It is described in great detail
how this organization
finds the clients it is looking for
and how it informs them
about its product.
In addition,
it is described in great detail
about the innovative methods
of sales and marketing
that this organization uses.
Please, look at this example
and when you write your task
and when you borrow ideas
and methods of describing this section
in a society
with a limited responsibility
of Ukrov
regarding this section
of sales and marketing strategy,
for those who work
not with existing enterprises
but with enterprises
that are just about to open,
an example has been developed
called
Business Plan for Enterprises
without Legal Person
or COLARIT.
As we have already said,
this example
contains a lot of information
that does not correspond
to the business plan writing method.
It was done for educational purposes
but nevertheless
there was an attempt
to write this business plan.
This is a very important point
and it is very important
to understand
that this method
is not a solution
to solve the problem
of the business plan
that is being written
by the legal person
and that is why
it is necessary
to write a business plan
that is not a solution
to solve the problem
of the business plan
that is why
it is necessary
to understand
that this is a very important point
that is why
it is necessary
to understand
that this is a very important point
that is why
a business plan
is a very important part
of our business plan.
It is also a good idea
to write a business plan
that does not correspond
to the marketing.
Sales is how to deliver a product to a customer.
Marketing is how to inform
a customer about the product.
If the method of sales,
as we said,
is the organization of a trading point,
marketing is how to tell the information
that this product
is in your trading point.
The next piece of advice
is
to tell about the advantages
that you will get
using the representatives
or distributors.
That is, you will indicate
which companies will deliver
your product,
or it will be some private persons.
In any case, you need to indicate
what advantages
this company will give you,
what advantages will another company give you,
and
why you chose
this particular method.
In addition, you need to take into account
individual features,
individual characteristics.
If you use
legal sellers
or some physical persons,
or it will be brokers
or trading agents,
everyone has their own features.
And here we need to talk about the fact
that some sellers
need a fairly long period of time,
sometimes about a year,
in order to familiarize themselves
with the product and the territory.
To familiarize oneself means
to be able to sell it,
to offer it,
and to know which part of the territory
this product is sold,
and which part is not sold.
Sometimes there are such moments
when the same trading representatives
or some shops
sell goods
that bring a lot of profit
and that bring a little profit.
Nevertheless,
the assortment of goods
should include
those goods that bring more profit
and those goods that bring less profit.
In any case,
those representatives
you invite
should be clearly instructed
that they should provide
a complete assortment of the company.
This is the policy of the company,
not the policy of the seller
who sells something.
You will have a cross-section of interests here.
That is, the seller
who will sell your product
wants to take the best-selling goods
and sell them,
and he will sell them.
As an organizer of this business,
in order to maintain the image of your organization,
in order to maintain the reputation of the organization,
you need to sell other goods
and you need to maintain a wide range.
Therefore, in order for your distributor network
to promote your goods and services,
you will need to develop
a special system of incentives.
This system of incentives is called in different ways
bonuses,
discounts, etc.
You will have to
pay close attention to this issue
and work personally
with each agent
you will work with.
You have to work here as psychologists
and understand
what motivates to sell this seller,
and what motivates to sell this seller.
When you work with these
with your
agents or organizations
who will sell your goods,
after that you will already have information
and you will use it
from the point of view of profitability
this resource that you have.
This is a very important point
of developing a special system of incentives.
If you do not develop a system of incentives,
you will have some
sometimes we will say
negative and root consequences
when some agent
will develop a system of incentives for himself
because you did not do it for him.
Please pay attention to this useful advice
of professionals.
The next section is called
advertising and promotion of goods or services.
But we are already moving to the section
when we do not sell goods,
but we do marketing
and promote this product or service.
Here, this section includes
all advertising tools
that you are going to use.
These can be newspapers,
magazines, radio, television,
yellow pages,
communication programs with the public,
disposable advertising tools
and so on.
This is a very large list of events
that you will use,
but do not try to cover all these events.
Choose only those events
that are useful for you
in terms of profitability.
The next section is called
advertising and promotion of goods or services.
This is a very important point
of developing a system of incentives.
If you do not develop a system of incentives,
you will have some
sometimes we will say
negative and root consequences
when some agent
or a company
will not be able to
promote a product or service.
Remember, when we started
to consider this course,
we said that the goal of any business
is to make a profit.
And again, consider here
whether it is worth investing
in newspapers, magazines and television
that will not give you a return.
Keep in mind that you are not
some global organization
like Coca-Cola,
which is known all over the world
and there will be no such means
at this stage.
And you need to choose,
as they say, life by means
and choose only those means of information
that are available to you
and that will bring you
profit at the first stages.
In the future, if you grow up
and if you are competitive,
for example, with the same Coca-Cola,
you can advertise yourself
in every corner.
At the same time,
your advertising should be reasonable.
This is what professionals give.
First of all, you need to check
that your advertising tactics
coincide with the sales tactics.
What is meant here?
Advertising tactics is
how you convey information
to your customer.
If, for example, you work
with an advertising agent
who sells your product,
supply him with advertising
products about your product.
He, for example,
this same advertising agent
will sell your product.
Again, develop a system of incentives
so that he not only sells your product,
but also spreads some leaflets
and spreads some information
about your product.
And besides this,
so that he collects
the so-called feedback,
feedback on your product.
If, for example, he came
to some organization,
sold the product and left,
this agent will be very unprofitable
from the point of view of advertising tactics.
If he collected information
that he lacks
or maybe even made a list
in which he would include
such and such goods,
his customers asked him,
it will be a sales agent
who will simultaneously perform
both the functions of a sales agent
and an advertising agent.
And, of course, for such a sales agent
you need to develop
your own system of incentives
and your own system,
maybe even of punishment.
And the next thing
is the original packaging of the product.
The original packaging of the product
is a component part of marketing.
In order to develop
an attractive packaging,
you need to spend enough effort
and time and funds on it.
Here you can also work
together with your sales agents
and advertising agents
and representatives, and so on.
That is, here, again,
feedback is collected.
This is just a marketing study.
I mean feedback.
That is, the person who works
with your customers,
he collects information.
It can be anyone.
As we said, it can be
either a sales agent
or a salesman
who works at a trading point
and, let's say, even a cashier
who sits at the checkout.
He can also serve
as a connecting link
at what stage you need
to do something.
Of course, the cashier
has his own function,
and the cashier performs
only certain functions.
Nevertheless, you can
attract the cashier to this activity
and create an atmosphere
around him.
Just put the same flyers
where the opinion of the customer
about how this is done
or how this is done
would be asked.
In Russian conditions,
this information is
widely spread.
And very often,
when customers come to the checkout,
they often fill out some forms,
fill out some surveys.
And even special people
are sometimes attracted to this case,
who conduct these marketing studies
for the appropriate reward.
And this feedback,
this connection that exists
between the customer
and these advertising agents,
it is transmitted to the marketing department
and, in general,
this data and this connection
are already transferred to the company,
and the company makes some changes
to the product,
including the packaging
that we started talking about.
The packaging can be made
standard and simple at the first stage,
and then this packaging
will be modified.
But modify this packaging
not based on some statistical data
not related to your customers,
but use the feedback of the customers,
and this feedback
will be transferred to the packaging.
The next point is
participation in exhibitions.
If you participate in some exhibitions,
and these exhibitions will be
part of your advertising tactics,
be sure to tell about it
in the business plan.
Specify all the events
you plan to participate in.
But don't just list the events
and say that we will participate
on this date,
on this day,
on this day.
Why do you think
that participation in this exhibition
will bring you profit?
And one more point
that should be specified.
I just mentioned
that participation in this exhibition
will bring profit.
In fact, if you consider
not a long-term plan,
not a long-term strategy,
but a long-term plan,
the results will be obtained
in the future,
when this exhibition
will start to work.
Or rather, not even an exhibition,
but the results of those clients
who went to this exhibition
will begin to affect.
That is, they will begin
to spread information
about your company,
they will begin to buy
your products.
In addition,
the results of the exhibition
will be positive only,
I mean positive
in terms of balance and profit,
only after some time.
You will not get the results
of this exhibition right away.
Therefore, when you make
your business plan
and when you plan this exhibition,
take into account these costs
and distribute them over the period.
It is very important to convince
the investor or maybe not the investor,
but the partner who will invest
in this exhibition
with some ideas,
maybe technologies,
that participation in this exhibition
is necessary and that further participation
in this exhibition will be paid off.
This is how it is done at the exhibitions.
Management
The next section
that we will consider
is called Management.
This is a very important section
in terms of internal communications,
planning, motivation of staff,
and so on.
You have considered this section
in other disciplines,
such as strategic management,
general management,
and so on.
Here you will need to apply
all your knowledge
in order to briefly describe
everything that you have studied
earlier in this section.
What are the main positions here?
One of the main positions
is that a good team of managers
can take even an average business idea
and make it a great business.
And vice versa,
poor management is often unable
to implement even a very good business idea.
Based on this,
you need to select the personnel for the organization.
When you will describe this section,
think about the fact
that this section of the business plan
should demonstrate
that the team of managers
that you have selected
or will select
is able to manage effectively.
This section consists of four subsections.
The first subsection
is the description of the management functions.
The second subsection is the right to property.
The third subsection is the board of directors
or the board of consultants.
And the fourth subsection
is the services for business support.
The first subsection
is the description of the management functions.
Before selecting the personnel,
you need to clearly specify
who will perform what duties.
Thus, use this subsection
to describe the managers of the company,
including the duties
of the manager.
The demonstration
that your managers
have or will have
a wide range of various skills
will convince investors
that the business will be successful.
Describe in detail
who you see as candidates
for those vacancies that are not yet filled.
What skills and experience
should these candidates have
to fulfill the goals set
before the enterprise?
What are the main challenges
that you face
in your department?
You may face such moments
that initially you planned one thing,
but then you found
that some solution
will be more effective.
Based on the fact
that various management schemes
are used for various organizations.
If we return
to our two examples,
one example is
a society with a limited responsibility for blood,
which is a business
that is not yet
fully established.
The second example
is a company
without a legal person
who is just entering the market.
Naturally,
these two organizations
have different goals and tasks.
If you look at the section
describing the management functions
in these two business plans,
you will see
that for a society
with a limited responsibility for blood,
a functional structure is clearly described
and what measures should be taken
to strengthen this functional structure,
which is taken as the basis
of management in this organization.
If you look at another organization,
PBOYUL Colorit,
there is only one person
who will be engaged
in management functions
at the first stage.
And furthermore,
it is written that
two or three more people
will be involved
in the management functions.
Naturally,
since this organization
is just opening up
and,
like any other
opening up organization,
this organization
does not have enough funds,
the business plan was written
by the entrepreneurs themselves
with the involvement
of as few specialists as possible.
And therefore,
there are a lot of mistakes
when writing a business plan.
In the business plan,
these mistakes are commented on
and you will see,
make your own business plan
from the comparison of these two descriptions.
The first description is for blood,
where the functional structure is considered
and with a detailed consideration
of what needs to be done
to strengthen the functional structure.
This is one extreme.
The second extreme
is when we have a raw,
poorly developed section
of this business plan,
where there are obvious mistakes
of non-professionals
who made this business plan.
Take into account both of these extremes
and create something of your own
in which you would describe
clearly the management functions
for each manager.
Well, we talked about
that if you have a business plan
with a wide range of various skills,
it will convince investors
that the business will be successful.
On the other hand,
think about
that if your organization is large,
then the management skills
should be less diverse.
They should be more specific
and more concentrated,
as we said.
That is, if at the lowest levels
of management
there are people
who are not very good
at the management functions,
but who have
universal skills,
then at the top
you should have people
who have specific skills
and who are not subordinate
to diverse people
who perform various functions,
but there are 2, 3, 4 people
with whom the work
on creating management documents,
on creating various plans,
strategies and so on
is already being carried out.
This should be taken into account
and taken into account.
What advice do professionals
give here
about writing this section?
Well, firstly,
you do not need to distribute people
by departments,
but only to assign responsible people
who will perform certain functions
as necessary.
This useful advice
is given to organizations
that are engaged in a rather
small business
that is, it can be said
about a small business
and enterprises of a medium business
that are only included in this niche.
If you are talking about enterprises
of a large business,
then you will need to distribute people
by departments,
as is done in the example of OO «Krov»
and it is by departments
to assign functions
for certain people.
The next advice is to include
appropriate details in the description of the management.
This means that
the information that is needed
for the management
is usually not necessary.
That is,
this is information that is needed
for the department of personnel,
information that is needed
for some other services.
Therefore, put the full summary
in the application,
and in the description of the management
describe only what relates
to management
according to each candidate,
according to each vacancy.
And if you are talking about
the management of the whole company,
write here only what relates
to higher management.
Next, the next advice is
to focus attention on those people
whose career is dedicated to work
related to your business.
Naturally, if a person has spent
several years in business
and is already familiar
with this environment,
precisely with the environment
in which he will continue to work,
then this will be the key,
this person will be the key
in your organization.
Therefore, when you will make
a summary, a short summary of these people,
put them first,
start with them,
and then move on to people
who are less related
to your business.
And finally, describe those people
who have little to do
with your business,
but who, for example,
have well-developed management skills,
management knowledge,
and who are attracted
to work in your organization.
The next point is description.
Arrange the description
in the reverse chronological order
and highlight the most significant
achievements in work.
Well, as with any summary,
you start with the latest,
or rather the earliest places of work
and end with the latest.
But do not overload,
do not overload the so-called
career ladder.
You should highlight
3-4 places of work,
because if a person has been doing something
for a very long time,
then it is unlikely that something
has already remained from that previous experience.
And highlight the most significant
achievements in work.
If a person even had something
in the previous experience,
as I said a long time ago,
but it was a very significant achievement
and it played a big role in his career,
then it is natural to highlight it.
And another point
is to focus on experience
and skills,
not knowledge.
If you focus
on education,
then it will be a mistake
in terms of describing managers.
Then we will say
when we select
auxiliary staff,
then, yes,
for example,
for economists,
for financiers,
it turns out
what kind of educational institution
this person graduated from.
Especially in the West,
maybe just one link or recommendation
that a student, for example,
graduated from Harvard,
it will already play a role.
In our conditions, this is not the case.
You need to focus on the work experience
that is related to your business.
And besides,
finish in this section
describing what experience
and skills are required
for a full-time job.
Try to make this description flexible.
Do not write tough instructions
that you need to do this,
this, this and this.
Divide this knowledge and skills
into key and auxiliary.
Start with key skills.
Describe these key skills
and focus on them.
After that, list the auxiliary skills.
When the same, for example,
department of personnel
that you will work in
or the person who will do it
naturally he will look for
key skills,
but sometimes there are such moments
when it is difficult to find a person
who would satisfy these requirements
100%.
In this case, auxiliary skills will be considered.
In this case, you will get
a flexible summary,
a flexible description of the vacancy.
The next section
is called the right to property.
In this section,
you describe the key people
who are the owners
and control the activity
of your enterprise.
In addition,
here are indicated
directly the owners.
In this section,
you need to specify who can
join the number of these owners.
Or this is any person
who can purchase
a share of the company's shares.
Or this is a limited number of people.
That is, you need to describe
what share of the company's shares
can be purchased.
If you write a business plan
to get financial funds,
it will be very important.
That is, how will he join your company.
Or he will purchase shares
and become an owner
and will purchase them in such a size
that he will solve all the issues.
Or he can purchase
only a limited number of shares
and have a very weak impact
on this company.
That is, here again you need to look.
On the one hand, you need to attract
a potential investor,
who will think about
how you look at the further management
of the company.
Or are you going to give
the management of this company to someone
who may not even be competent.
Or are you still going to own this company
and manage it yourself.
This is what this section of the right of ownership exists for.
On the one hand,
I told you that in the right of ownership
there should be a lot of such moments
who and how will manage the company.
But on the other hand,
the formulation of the right of ownership
is very simple and concise.
If you open the e-mail,
there is a formulation of the right of ownership
and literally there are 2-3 sentences.
Who owns what.
For example, the formulation is made in such a way
that the director owns 95% of the shares
and his assistant owns 5% of the shares.
There is not a word about
that someone can buy this enterprise
or join the right of ownership.
But this is the formulation of the right of ownership
in the example.
You make your own formulation of the right of ownership
and take into account that the one who reads this business plan
and if he wants to invest in this enterprise,
it is unlikely that he will be able to arrange such a formulation
when he will not be able to acquire any share of the company
and, accordingly, not become the co-owner of this company.
Here, in addition to the formal moments
that we have discussed now,
it is necessary to write who is included in the board of directors or consultants.
This means names, positions, education, qualifications.
It is necessary to dwell in detail on the experience of each member of the board of directors
and how each of these members will influence the prosperity of your business.
There are two points here.
On the one hand, the members of the board of directors
are people who financially support the company.
On the other hand, these are people who have some connections
and who are specialists.
If they are specialists, describe those people
who are in this board of directors or consultants,
how their experience and knowledge will be used
to provide qualified assistance in managing the company
and in the qualifications that they have,
not from the point of view of management,
but, for example, in the board of your directors,
there is a specialist who can perform some technical tasks.
That is, on the one hand, he is a manager,
on the other hand, he is a specialist, let's say, in IT technologies.
Describe how you will attract him
both for the management of the company
and for providing some services to the company
in the development of IT technologies, etc.
In addition, you need to specify the connections of the board of directors
and the opportunities for attracting additional capital.
Useful tips that professionals give when writing this section.
First, you need to formulate a tip that complements the existing management.
You have a team of managers who are engaged in managing the organization.
It is recommended to make a table in which you need to indicate skills
that are required to promote your company,
so that your company flourishes and moves up.
List out of these skills those that already exist
and which managers already have.
If you do not have these skills,
think about who to include in the board to complement the existing management.
The next tip is typical for Western companies,
for Western entrepreneurs, for the Western style of management,
but it is not typical for Russian reality.
This tip sounds like you need to avoid frequent repeated mistakes
when the board of directors is formed of friends.
First of all, think about what business qualities are needed,
and only then think about friends.
If you form a board of directors of friends,
very often these subjective factors,
these connections that will limit you and keep you,
will not give you the opportunity to develop the company.
We have already said in the previous section
that it is necessary to talk about what connections exist
among the members of the board of directors,
but this does not mean friendly and family ties,
but business ties,
when the members of the board of directors can provide something for the company.
I repeat, the advice is that the board of directors
should try to avoid family and friendly ties,
at least at the first stages.
The next tip is if the board of directors has not yet been formed,
use this section to discuss the skills and experience
that you have planned for the board of directors.
That is, you can make a project of some kind of document,
a project of the board of directors,
in which you will present what you would like to see,
and then as a result of the discussion you will change some points,
add something, reduce something.
The next section of the board of directors
is called services for business support.
We have already said that in order to ensure the normal work of the whole organization,
you need auxiliary staff
who will provide the work of the main staff.
This auxiliary staff does not belong to the department of management,
but nevertheless it is described in this section,
since it serves as a background,
it serves as a background for creating normal work of the main staff.
It performs the core work that will support the work of other people.
This is such a staff as lawyers, accountants, advertising agencies,
technical workers and other employees
who provide the production process.
Here, when we talk about these people,
we need to specify not only the experience of their work,
not only their skills and some practical applications,
but we also need to talk about their qualifications from the point of view of their education.
Because basically these are people who receive all the knowledge
during the training process,
especially if you will attract some Western specialist for your organization,
pay close attention to where this person worked,
what are his recommendations, what education he received, and so on.
That is, useful tips can sound like this.
Focus on the education of the auxiliary staff.
This is a useful advice on the qualification of lawyers, accountants, and so on.
When you recruit a manager,
you can say that he has some management skills
that appear only in the process of working with people.
People like lawyers, accountants, and technical workers
receive their knowledge during the training process.
If they did not receive this knowledge during the training process,
they will develop with technical means and numbers.
They will be accountants, they will be lawyers,
but they will not be as qualified as those people who received the appropriate education.
A couple of more tips that are recommended.
The first is to ask experienced people in the industry,
companies and private individuals who provide high-quality auxiliary services
for business organization and service.
Here you can use your relatives, anyone,
who would recommend you where to get high-quality auxiliary staff.
Your relatives will not offend you if they tell you
that they hired high-quality auxiliary staff for their organization.
But this advice will be useful for you,
because you will not waste time and money
to hire staff and then test it on your organization.
This recommendation would be useful for your relatives.
In addition to this subjective factor of the recommendation of relatives,
there is also the so-called official information.
This official information is located in the listed companies
that provide auxiliary services for business organization and service.
This information can be found in professional trading magazines
and other official publications.
The last section that we will consider is called the financial plan.
As we have already said, the financial plan is a very serious document.
In some cases, entrepreneurs even make two business plans.
One business plan for the main technical part,
and the second business plan for the same main, but financial part.
And the third business plan is not an independent part,
but an auxiliary part, that is, an application.
We consider the financial plan only as a introductory part,
because you have considered it in other disciplines.
And within such a short course,
you cannot consider the financial plan in detail.
What is it?
The financial plan is a verbal description
confirmed by financial reports,
which document the vitality of the business
and its attractiveness from the point of view of investment.
When writing a financial plan,
entrepreneurs use a large number of different documents,
and again, different entrepreneurs act differently.
Some take these financial documents to the application,
some leave them in the sections of the financial plan itself.
What are the options here?
If the business plan is written for investors,
then the section of the financial plan includes all the information
and consists of the following sections.
The first section is the risk section.
The second section is the report on the movement of money.
The third section is the balance of money spending and receipts.
The fourth section is the report on profits and losses.
And the fifth section is the requested amount of financing and profitability.
Of these five sections, which you can see on the screen,
the first section is the risk section,
and the last section is the requested amount of financing and profitability.
They are important for a person who will read this financial business plan
from the point of view of investment.
Three other documents, the report on the movement of money,
the balance of money spending and receipts,
and the report on profits and losses,
are purely accounting documents.
They are also important,
but all these five sections can be divided into two large sections.
The first section is the risk section,
and the requested amount of financing and profitability.
And the second section is accounting documents,
which we have already mentioned.
In this regard, you can see another option for writing a business plan,
when the risk section is taken out completely into a separate section.
We did not talk about this with you,
but there are other business plan options.
In this case, if the business plan is used as a guide for business development,
then only two accounting documents can be left out of these three documents,
the report on the movement of money and the report on profits and losses.
These documents contain all the necessary figures
by which you can assess the company's activity.
I repeat that within this course,
the composition of the listed documents is not required,
it is only a matter of determining the point of loss,
that is, this is the level of sales,
at which the total costs are equal to the total revenue from sales.
Or you can calculate the profitability coefficient as an option.
The ratio of profit from the implementation of a product to the total costs.
When is the point of no loss determined,
when is the profitability coefficient determined.
The point of no loss is determined for small organizations,
for example, this is a company without a legal education.
Again, I agree with our example,
this is an organization called Colorit,
which provides photo services.
Here it is enough to determine the point of no loss.
The profitability coefficient is a more detailed document
that requires more effort and time to determine it.
Therefore, it is already used in organizations.
The second example we are considering is a society
with a limited responsibility for blood.
There you can determine the profitability coefficient.
As an example, in the application of electronic aid,
a financial plan for the creation of a new company for public food,
a coffee shop in the city of Moscow, is provided.
This is a new enterprise, it did not exist before,
and therefore the financial plan was made by the entrepreneurs themselves.
We will not say rude, but some grammatical and stylistic mistakes.
Do not pay attention to this.
If you make a similar financial business plan,
then this will be enough.
Now about the task you are doing.
Now we have come to the point
when we have considered all the sections of our business plan
from the point of view of theory, from the point of view of methodology,
from the point of view of examples, from the point of view of performing control tasks.
We talked about four control tasks that we performed,
and we talked about the fact that at the initial stage,
these control tasks are performed in the form of a draft draft.
When you make a document, following the instructions
described in the task, at a certain stage,
we have compiled these four documents and began to make a general document
called the business plan of the entire commercial enterprise.
This is the final document, this is the fifth document that you make.
In this fifth document, the artistic style of description is used,
and in this fifth document, the data of the previous four documents are used.
I remind you again of two examples that we have.
The first example is a society with a limited responsibility for blood.
The second example is the Kalorit lawless enterprise.
Now, when you start writing your business plan,
use the sequence of the business plan, something like this.
You open the business plan, for example,
the society with a limited responsibility for blood,
and start with the title sheet, how it is performed in a society with a limited responsibility for blood.
Then you make a summary, and then you make a content.
All these tasks have already been completed.
You just need to transfer them to the basis that you should have made
from the point of view of the artistic style of description.
Next, you go to the section of the essence of the project.
In the section of the essence of the project, we also performed control tasks.
You take those control tasks that you have already completed.
You have performed these control tasks dry, theoretically.
You have listed the factors according to the instructions
that were written to perform each of these control tasks.
Now you are already transferring these control tasks to the final task,
and again, you use the artistic style of description.
I repeat once again that despite the fact that the second example,
which is called the Kalorit lawless enterprise,
the business plan for this enterprise is written with errors,
despite this, it can be used to write your business plan.
You can look at some things, you can look at some moments from this business plan,
but those details that are highlighted, when you open this tool,
you will see which parts of this business plan are erroneous.
You just don't use them, they are included so that you avoid mistakes
when writing your business plan.
Well, in principle, everything according to our course.
As a result of studying the short business planning course,
you have learned to formulate your thoughts in a short and clear way,
to formulate your business ideas and to express them in a simple and accessible form
on the computer screen and on paper.